feat: Responsive markup extension (#926)
unoplatform/uno.toolkit.ui: doc/helpers/responsive-extension.md

Author: @Xiaoy312 sorry, it's not super clear
1. for Summary, do I remove the heading `## Summary` and just keep those two lines of summary under the main `# ResponsiveExtension` heading? And then also remove `### Inheritance` and `### Constructors`?

Or "(summary here)" means keeping things as they are, i.e. `## Summary` with sub-headings `### Inheritance` and `### Constructors`? (I tend to think you meant this second option)

2. Since ResponsiveLayout becomes a level 3 sub-heading inside Properties, do I keep its own Properties as a level 4 sub-heading? So props inside layout inside props?

Or do I remove the layout's properties section?

Thanks!

Author: [responsive-extension.md](https://github.com/unoplatform/uno.toolkit.ui/files/13514890/responsive-extension.md)

This is what it looks like after the restructuring, is this what you meant @Xiaoy312 ?

---

> uid: Toolkit.UI.ResponsiveExtension

Reviewer: ```suggestion
uid: Toolkit.Helpers.ResponsiveExtension
```

Author: The extension is currently in the `Uno.Toolkit.UI` namespace
![image](https://github.com/unoplatform/uno.toolkit.ui/assets/10283398/7d8df8e5-8437-4d66-a2d2-62e8c8cf012e)

Should I move it to the Helpers folder and in the same namespace as the helper?

Reviewer 2: this uid has nothing to do with the class namespace
just how we organize the stuffs in terms how they are structured on the docs site
so far the rules are:
(controls) -> Toolkit.Controls.*
(attached properties, markup extensions, helpers)(or, not controls) -> Toolkit.Helpers.*

---
# ResponsiveExtension

## Summary

> The `ResponsiveExtension` class is a markup extension in the Uno Toolkit UI library that enables the adaptation of UI element properties based on the current window width.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `ResponsiveExtension` class is a markup extension that enables the customization `UIElement` properties based on on screen size.
```

Author: done

| Narrow     | object           | Value to be used when the screen size is narrow.           |
| Normal     | object           | Value to be used when the screen size is normal.           |
| Wide       | object           | Value to be used when the screen size is wide.             |
| Widest     | object           | Value to be used when the screen size is at its widest.    |
| Layout     | ResponsiveLayout | Overrides the screen size thresholds/breakpoints.          |

### Usage
```xml
xmlns:utu="using:Uno.Toolkit.UI"
...
<Page.Resources>
	<SolidColorBrush x:Key="NarrowRed">Crimson</SolidColorBrush>
	<SolidColorBrush x:Key="WideBlue">Blue</SolidColorBrush>
</Page.Resources>
...
<TextBlock Text="Asd"
		   Background="{utu:Responsive Narrow={StaticResource NarrowRed}, Wide={StaticResource WideBlue}}" />
```

## Remarks
**Property type limitation**: Content property values other than strings must be appropriately typed for the markup extension to interpret them correctly.
In the usage example above, the values `NarrowRed` and `WideBlue` are properly typed as they refer to the `StaticResource` keys defined in `Page.Resources`.

> For instance, using `Background={utu:Responsive Narrow=SkyBlue, Wide=Pink}` would be incorrect, while the string literal usage under `<TextBlock Text="{utu:Responsive Narrow='Narrow format', Wide='Wide format'}" />` is accepted.

Reviewer: @Xiaoy312 there's no way around this?

How is MAUI able to do things like this with [OnPlatform](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/maui/platform-integration/customize-ui-appearance?view=net-maui-8.0#customize-ui-appearance-based-on-the-platform)?

```xml
<BoxView Color="{OnIdiom Yellow, Phone=Red, Tablet=Green, Desktop=Blue}"
         WidthRequest="{OnIdiom 100, Phone=200, Tablet=300, Desktop=400}"
         HeightRequest="{OnIdiom 100, Phone=200, Tablet=300, Desktop=400}"
         HorizontalOptions="Center" />
```

Reviewer 2: it is possible, you gotta internally implement type conversion (btw that wont be available to uwp)
with the type hinted by IProvideValueTarget::TargetProperty::Type
however that is not done
we can probably add that in a follow-up pr

Due to a limitation of the UWP API (Windows target only), the `MarkupExtension.ProvideValue(IXamlServiceProvider)` overload is unavailable, which is required to continuously update the value.
Because of this, the markup extension will only provide the initial value, and will not respond to window size changes.

**Initialization**: The `ResponsiveHelper` needs to be hooked up to the window's `SizeChanged` event in order for it to receive updates when the window size changes.
This is typically done in the `App.xaml.cs` file, where you can get the current window and call the `HookupEvent` method on the `ResponsiveHelper`.
It is important to do this when the app launches, otherwise the `ResponsiveExtension` won't be able to update the property values when the window size changes.

Here is an example of how this might be achieved:

```cs
protected override void OnLaunched(LaunchActivatedEventArgs args)
{
#if NET6_0_OR_GREATER && WINDOWS && !HAS_UNO
	MainWindow = new Window();
#else
	MainWindow = Microsoft.UI.Xaml.Window.Current;
#endif
	// ...
	var helper = Uno.Toolkit.UI.Helpers.ResponsiveHelper.GetForCurrentView();

> 	helper.HookupEvent(MainWindow);

Reviewer: Can't this be done for us in the Toolkit init process? 

There's no way around this?

@Xiaoy312

Reviewer 2: if you can access the window somehow, yes of course
otherwise, no

Reviewer: @MartinZikmund are we gonna have some sort of way of accessing the current Window from the scope of a given UIElement?

---
uid: Toolkit.UI.ResponsiveExtension
---
# ResponsiveExtension

## Summary
The `ResponsiveExtension` class is a markup extension in the Uno Toolkit UI library that allows you to adapt the properties of a UI element based on the current window width.
This is particularly useful for creating responsive designs that look good on a variety of screen sizes.

> ### C#
> ```csharp
> public partial class ResponsiveExtension : MarkupExtension, IResponsiveCallback
> ```
> 
> ### XAML
> ```xml
> xmlns:utu="using:Uno.Toolkit.UI"
> ...
> 
> <utu:ResponsiveExtension />
> ```
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
^ remove, no use

|-----------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| ResponsiveExtension() | Initializes a new instance of the `ResponsiveExtension` class. |

### Properties
| Property   | Type             | Description                                                                                         |
| ---------- | ---------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Narrowest  | object           | Value to be used when the screen size is at its narrowest.                                          |
| Narrow     | object           | Value to be used when the screen size is narrow.                                                    |
| Normal     | object           | Value to be used when the screen size is normal.                                                    |
| Wide       | object           | Value to be used when the screen size is wide.                                                      |
| Widest     | object           | Value to be used when the screen size is at its widest.                                             |

> | Layout     | ResponsiveLayout | Overrides the MaxWidth for each screen size: `Narrowest`, `Narrow`, `Normal`, `Wide`, and `Widest`. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Layout     | ResponsiveLayout | Overrides the screen size threshold/breakpoints. |
```

### Usage

> ```xml
> <!-- Include the following XAML namespace to use the sample below -->
> xmlns:utu="using:Uno.Toolkit.UI"
> ...
> <Page.Resources>
> 	<SolidColorBrush x:Key="NarrowRed">Crimson</SolidColorBrush>
> 	<SolidColorBrush x:Key="WideBlue">Blue</SolidColorBrush>
> </Page.Resources>
> ...
> <Border Width="30"
> 		Height="30"
> 		HorizontalAlignment="Left"
> 		Background="{utu:Responsive Normal={StaticResource NarrowRed},
> 									Wide={StaticResource WideBlue}}" />
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```xml
xmlns:utu="using:Uno.Toolkit.UI"
...

<Page.Resources>
	<SolidColorBrush x:Key="NarrowRed">Crimson</SolidColorBrush>
	<SolidColorBrush x:Key="WideBlue">Blue</SolidColorBrush>
</Page.Resources>
...

<TextBlock Text="Asd"
		   Background="{utu:Responsive Normal={StaticResource NarrowRed}, Wide={StaticResource WideBlue}}" />
```
```

Reviewer 2: you should also add a remark here, that for anything other that `string`, you will need to properly "type" the value.
eg: Background={Responsive Normal=SkyBlue, Wide=Pink} will be an incorrect usage

Author: updated the section

## Remarks

> **Platform Limitations**: The ability to update property values when the window size changes is only available on targets other than Windows UWP. On UWP targets, where only the parameterless constructor is available, the property value can only be set initially and cannot be updated if the window size changes. This is a limitation of UWP, and the class logs a warning message when the extension is used on UWP.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Platform Limitations**: The ability to update property values when the window size changes is only available on targets other than Windows UWP. Due to limitation of UWP api (only for windows target), the `MarkupExtension.ProvideValue(IXamlServiceProvider)` overload is unavailable, which is required to continuously update the value. Because of this, this markup-extension will only provide the initial value, and will not respond to window size change.
```

Author: updated

> **Initialization**: The `ResponsiveHelper` needs to be hooked up to the window�s `SizeChanged` event in order for it to receive updates when the window size changes. This is typically done in the `App.xaml.cs` file, where you can get the current window and call the `HookupEvent` method on the `ResponsiveHelper`. It�s important to do this when the app launches, otherwise the `ResponsiveExtension` won�t be able to update the property values when the window size changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Initialization**: The `ResponsiveHelper` needs to be hooked up to the window's `SizeChanged` event in order for it to receive updates when the window size changes. This is typically done in the `App.xaml.cs` file, where you can get the current window and call the `HookupEvent` method on the `ResponsiveHelper`. It's important to do this when the app launches, otherwise the `ResponsiveExtension` won't be able to update the property values when the window size changes.
```
avoid french symbols

Here is an example of how this might be achieved:

```cs

> #if IS_WINUI
> using XamlWindow = Microsoft.UI.Xaml.Window;
> #else
> using XamlWindow = Windows.UI.Xaml.Window;
> #endif
> ...
> public sealed partial class App : Application
> {
> 	private XamlWindow _window;
> ...
> #if NET5_0_OR_GREATER && WINDOWS && !HAS_UNO
> 	_window = new XamlWindow();
> 	_window.Activate();
> #else
> 	_window = XamlWindow.Current;
> #endif
> 
> 	var helper = Uno.Toolkit.UI.Helpers.ResponsiveHelper.GetForCurrentView();
> 	helper.HookupEvent(_window);
> }

Reviewer 2: ignore the uwp/winui difference, most consumers will be using winui (if they multi-target, they know)
use the code from the default app template
and make sure to include the containing method, so the reader can easily locate
```suggestion
protected override void OnLaunched(LaunchActivatedEventArgs args)
{
#if NET6_0_OR_GREATER && WINDOWS && !HAS_UNO
	MainWindow = new Window();
#else
	MainWindow = Microsoft.UI.Xaml.Window.Current;
#endif

	// ...

	var helper = Uno.Toolkit.UI.Helpers.ResponsiveHelper.GetForCurrentView();
	helper.HookupEvent(_window);
}
```
